[WOOSHING]
[UPBEAT CHIMES]
>> Grief is the realization
of the loss of a dream.
If you have a relationship
with somebody,
you build an expectation
and a model of reality
with your mind.
And then, when
that is torn away,
when that person dies or leaves
you or something happens,
the breaking of that expectation
takes away your security.
So there's fear, but also, there
is incredible feeling of loss,
of sadness, of
feeling incomplete
because you built a sense
of your completeness
around living within your dream.
And when the dream
collapses, it's
as if your whole
identity has died.
There's a mini death involved,
because we know ourselves
in part through our
relationships with all
the people around us.
It's like when my father
died last September,
I went around saying to
everybody, now I'm an orphan.
But I saw that something
very profound changed in me.
That up until then,
even though dad was 90
and I was definitely out on
my own for many, many years,
there was a way in
which my identity
in terms of elder and child,
and something changed.
And there was a loss
of the security that
came from being identified
as always having somebody
that was my elder
and that was there
to finally protect me or
take care of me or something.
And grief is the mind's attempt
to deal with the breakdown
of expectation.
And what you do
to deal with grief
is that, at first, you
grab states of mind
to try to make it go
away or to counteract
sadness, depression, crying.
And the tricky or the art
is not to grab prematurely
to try to make it go away.
Like a lot of people who
break off in a relationship
and then start to grieve over
the loss of relationship,
react to their grieving by
grabbing a new relationship.
And they're building
the new relationship
on the sand of the
grieving of the old one.
And they haven't given it the
space to run its course through
to come out the other end.
So I'm inclined always to
push people back into grief,
rather than to bring them out.
But not have any model about
how people should grieve.
I don't think you've
got to show emotion.
But I think there
is a timing, there
is a healing
process that goes on
as you start to exist
after the dream has died.
And then after a
while, there's kind
of a natural way in which the
raw ends kind of heal a bit,
and you start to find new
ways of being in the universe.
And that's just very gentle.
And up until that time,
it's like a roller coaster.
A person gets very sad.
And then they seem
to be all better
and everybody says, oh, you've
dealt with it very well.
And you come up and
you're all smiley.
And then suddenly,
it hits you again.
And it can hit you with
seeing somebody's shoes
or their old biscuit
box or whatever.
I mean, suddenly it
awakens it again.
Subtle thing about
grief is where
people feel that
if I stop grieving,
I am betraying the
person or the thing that
left, because I'm forgetting.
And I must remember, or
else I wasn't a true lover.
The extraordinary
thing about it is
that as you quiet down from
the active process of grieving,
you quiet down and
you listen and you
begin to appreciate that
the way in which you
are with another person
in love exists independent
of coming and going,
even independent of death
and all of those things.
Sri Ramana Maharshi
the saint said
when he was dying of cancer--
and everybody said to
him, Bhagwan, Bhagwan,
don't leave us, don't leave us.
And he looked confused.
He says, don't be silly.
Where could I go?
I mean, I'm just
dropping the body.
I'm not going anywhere.
And so you realize
that the grieving
is part of the dramatic
storyline of your separateness.
Because you can't
grieve for something
that didn't go anywhere.
And it's interesting because
even if you break off
with a lover and
there's acrimony,
to the extent that
there was even
a moment of true
love between the two
of you, of true transcendent
oneness, that's there,
that thing has no time and
space connected with it.
We keep reducing relationships
into time and space.
Like if you love me, you'd
spend more time with me.
You wouldn't leave me.
And it's very
profound to me now.
And that it has
tempered my life a lot,
because I now am not willing to
spend as much time with people
as I used to, to reassure
them that the love is there.
And I see it as their
needfulness constantly.
Do you love me?
How much time will
you spend with me?
Will you do this with me?
Will you do that?
Can I have more of you?
And it's because they
can't get inside behind
to the place where, where
we go for one another?
And I find it
extremely interesting
to love people more and more
and awaken in them the feelings
of love and then watch their
minds take that and turn it
into something
that fear touches,
so that then they want to grab
it and collect it and keep
testing it and
being sure about it.
And when you want to say,
it's here, it's here.
We don't even have to
see each other again,
and it's still here.
That's a big one
to ask of people.
I understand that.
[INSPIRATIONAL MUSIC]